---
title: "\"Locke\"<br/>(Chapter One)"
layout: post
author: "Daniel A. Matysiak"
categories: ["summary", "locke", "feser"]
usemathjax: true
---

In the opening chapter, Feser gives the reader an overview of Locke's significance as the
perhaps not the father of *modern philosophy* (an "honor" reserved for Descartes), but the
father of *modernity*. No other modern philosopher has had the influence on the modern
world that Locke has had, and so, if we wish to understand ourselves, we need to
understand Locke.

Of all the countries in the world, the United States is, without a doubt, the most
Lockean. It is in America, Feser writes, that liberty of various kinds "rings loudest",
explicable, in part, as a consequence of the British Empire's legacy in the region, as it
became a vehicle by which liberalism's influence was exported around the world during the
last 300 years, perhaps especially to its American colonies. Feser notes that it is from
Locke, by way of his treatise *Essay Concerning Human Understanding*, that we inherit a
disposition to put little stock in authority and tradition as a source of moral and
theoretical guidance. We hold empirical science as the paradigm of knowledge and
rationality. At the same time, we are highly skeptical about what can be known, even by
science. In similar fashion, we prize religious freedom highly, as we are skeptical of the
defensibility of most particular religious dogmas. Here, we can trace this orientation to
Locke's *Letter Concerning Toleration*. Locke's influence is also profound in the defense
of the rights of the individual against the power of the state, the theme of *Second
Treatise of Government*, which takes rights to have a theological foundation in a
"distinctively modern, Enlightenment-style theology". In this context, Locke maintains
that, however else it is constrained, reason can reveal "that there is a God, that that
God has granted us certain rights, and that these rights put severe constraints on the
ambition and power of human governments". These rights include rights to private property
and the fruit of one's labor, a stance that has been used to defend free market economics.

However, Feser notes, there are tensions in and problems with the Lockean project that
need to be examined closely. Despite their liberalism, most philosophers today would
probably reject the theological basis for liberalism that Locke gave it. Can liberalism
stand without them? But even within that theological foundation lie tensions
characteristic of the Lockean project, namely, the tension between a modern scientific
vision of mankind, and human dignity and human rights; a minimalist, empirically-oriented
theory of knowledge, and ambitious and controversial moral and metaphysical claims about
the nature of persons; individual liberty of thought and action, and prerequisites for a
stable, free and just society. There are also problems with epistemological and
metaphysical theses that Locke sought to provide the basis for modern science (empiricist,
individualist, anti-authoritarian). It must be determined whether his way of grounding
these things can be defended. Also, Feser writes, for Locke, freedom is exercised within
definite moral and rational constraints, but we must determine whether these constraints
are compatible with his conception of freedom. Finally, because Locke keeps some aspects
of medieval thought and rejects others, we must also determnine whether the retained
elements can coherently be kept while excluding those Locke rejected.

In the remainder of the chapter, Feser sketches an autobiography of Locke that helps to
give the reader historical context that can aid him in understanding both the intellectual
context and historical events that shaped or may have shaped Locke's reasoning.
