---
title: "\"Intentional Logic\"<br/>(Chapter One)"
layout: post
author: "Daniel A. Matysiak"
usemathjax: true
---

The first chapter of Veatch's "Intentional Logic" poses challenges that the remainder of
the book aims to address. Veatch acknowledges that the achievements in logic in the fifty
to seventy-five years before the book's printing are significant, but he wishes to
establish how they are significant, or as he puts it, "for what and in what way" they are
so. He inquires about the nature of the achievements of mathematical logic and whether
they truly are achievements in logic *per se*. He wonders about the claim that
mathematical logic has "made logic genuinely mathematical" and, in doing so, has been
transformed "into an instrument of unparalleled scope and power". He questions this
presumption as far as its broad scope and generality are concerned, as the adequacy of an
instrument of knowledge is measured not by how adapted the subject matter is to the
instrument, but how adapted the instrument is to the subject matter. Thus, the "remarkable
vigor and precision" of mathematical logic, while well-suited in some domains, may not be
up to the task in others. Its claim of generality or general applicability must be
substantiated by showing that the "realities that are the subject matter of philosophy and
the sciences" are susceptible to the mathematical treatment demanded by mathematical
logic. Veatch mentions a few historical logics (e.g., Hegelian logic) that, despite their
undeniable power, tortured the treated subject matter to fit their own image and were
ultimately found to be wanting, and ultimately discarded.

In Veatch's view, logicians are, in general, prone to this temptation of the so-called
"law of instrument". The occupational hazard of logicians---to collapse the logical into
the real, or the real into the logical---leads to the false conviction that "logic is its
own justification". Meanwhile, it is the reality that is sought to be known through logic
that is the measure of a logic's adequacy. No matter how "elaborate and intricate" a logic
is, it cannot justify itself as an adequate instrument for the task. At the time of the
book's writing, a tendency to reduce philosophy to logic had emerged, of which Veatch is
critical, for the aforementioned reasons.

As briefly noted above, Veatch contends that, like the idealists who came before them,
modern logicians fail to distinguish the logical from the real. However, unlike the
idealists who came before them, modern logicians do not confuse the logical with the real
so much as they confuse the real with the logical. Real relations, which are, strictly
speaking, the province of metaphysics, are taken to be logical relations. Similarly,
logical relations like the relation of subject to predicate, are interpreted as real
relations, obscuring their "distinctively logical character and function". Accordingly, in
the coming chapters, Veatch intends to address the question of whether the achievements of
mathematical logic constitute *bona fide* achievements in logic proper, as well as the
question of what the proper relation is of logic to philosophy, especially metaphysics,
and whether logic can stand on its own, or else is forced to presuppose metaphysics.
